# The open-source chatbot that accidentally built a community - Transcript

Hello!  It is good to be back here with you again at Linux Conference Australia.  I am here to talk about - community building!  How it happens, how you can help it along, and specifically how you can help it along with the open-source chatbot that accidentally built a community.  First of all, I would like to acknowledge the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation, on whose land this talk was recorded.  This is and always will be Aboriginal land.  Their sovereignty was never ceded.  I would also like to acknowledge the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mentors that I had growing up; who, among many other things, taught me the importance of stories.  I would not be giving this particular talk at this particular conference without them.

So, I'm sure that all of you have met me by now, but for those of you that haven't, my name is Dawn.  I am a person who wears many hats - sometimes a DevOps hat, sometimes an SRE hat, sometimes a security hat.  Outside of work I am an occasional author and kitchen alchemist; sometimes that ends really well, sometimes it doesn't.  I'm also a raging sportsball fan, which is why all of the photographs and general depictions of me around today are of me in Boston Bruins sweaters.

So - this talk is kind of about a story within a story.  And I could pick many different points at which to start the story that I'm about to tell you, but probably the best starting point that I can pick for this is an event called National Novel Writing Month.  It starts long before I got involved with it, but the event itself runs every November.  It started in 1999, ah, I was quite young in 1999.  And the goal of National Novel Writing Month is, every year, pe- in November, people get together to write 50,000 words in 30 days.  Essentially the aggregate of that is, er - your aim is to complete 1,667 words per day, approximately on average, in order to hit the 50,000 words - which is no small feat.  Erm, that's quite a bit of writing.

I first encountered National Novel Writing Month in 2012, and I completed it in 2012 and 2013.  Erm, this was kind of my transition - writing is something that I have done for most of my life as a hobby, and it was kind of my transition from writing short stories to writing more long-form.  So that was how I encountered National Novel Writing Month, and I did complete it the first two years that I participated in it.  Then, life happened for a few years, and I took a break from 2014 to 2016; I went and did other things with my November.

One important thing to know about National Novel Writing Month is that it's kind of set up - you can, if you want, just participate online.  But- a lot of the events and things that happen around National Novel Writing Month are set up through local groups.  They run events both in person and online; obviously, the past couple of years, it's been much more online - ah, we'll get to that later.  And they're run by Municipal Liaisons, who are people who volunteer, essentially, their time and energy to wrangle members of the community who are interested in participating in this event; get them together for, you know, small in-person events, and to see how many words everyone can write.

And after I moved to Melbourne, I joined the Melbourne National Novel Writing Month group for the first time in 2017.  This was the first real encounter that I'd had with in-person National Novel Writing Month events.  It was really interesting to get out, sort of meet new people and see what was going on there, but Melbourne also had quite a significant number of online events.  And at the time, those online events run on IRC.  Considering the demographic that we're talking about here, I imagine that most people have probably encountered Internet Relay Chat before in their life, but for those of you who've not, it's an open-source protocol which is- deployed in many places around the world that allows people in distributed locations to converse with each other over the internet.  Which is really a lot of words to say that it's essentially an open-source chat client.  And there are many many IRC servers, many different IRC instances out in the world, and there are also many different IRC clients that people can use to connect.

Something that may not be so apparent to the demographic here, though, is - particularly if you've got your own preference of IRC client that you've been using for many years, for a lot of people who are not very tech savvy ,IRC is actually really hard to set up.  And that means that if you are someone who is into something like- writing, and you want to use IRC to communicate with your writing groups, you're probably going to have to use a terrible IRC client like Mibbit, the one that's currently up on the screen.  Probably everyone who's ever had an encounter with IRC in recent times has attempted to use Mibbit, and has found the many ways in which it's wanting.

So the Melbourne group, after the event in 2017, decided that they wanted to migrate to- a chat platform that was much friendlier, particularly for people who weren't very tech savvy.  What they settled on was Discord.  Yes, I am talking about an- a closed-source chat application at an open-source conference; I do apologise.  The advantages of Discord essentially are around- user friendliness and ability to navigate around it in ways that IRC doesn't have.  Discord also has the concept of separate servers; standalone areas [swallow] with very little overlap in the way that they interact.  But Discord allows you to set up channels in a very different way to IRC.  It allows for sorting of channels, it allows for locking down of channels to specific people in ways that are much more effective.  And Discord also has a very friendly user interface for- pretty well everyone - including me with my- that pesky zoomed-in screen that I tend to talk about a lot - that you can relatively easily easily navigate around.

And you see a screenshot of it up here at the moment.  You can sort channels.  Every channel has a name, and you can see that it's very easy to see who's talking.  You don't just have the, erm, names, but you've also got colours, and you've got avatars as visual identifiers.  And the text is quite clear and readable as well, even on my zoomed-in screen.  So that was the primary motivation for moving to Discord.  It fixed a lot of the pain points in IRC around ease of use.

Some of the other pain points that it fixed, though, were around things like logging, and being able to actually track what people were doing.  Because in IRC, if you wanted to log interactions that happened when Municipal Liaisons - or really moderators of any group - aren't there, you have to actually have a bot do it for you.  But Discord, because they have centralised servers, has a persistent chat history.  So it means that if you've had, in - settings, small communities, where those community interactions very much focus - if you've had interactions between people that have been problematic, it's very easy for the moderators to come back in later and actually see what happened.  But unlike IRC, which did have, ah, a very good chat bot option, although rather quirky one, by the name of Timmy, erm, when the Melbourne group migrated to Discord, the options for chat bots that were specifically designed for writers were really limited.

And this is where I had a bad idea.  Because- a few people in the group had sort of said, you know, there aren't really any good options for bots, is there anyone around who has enough technical skill to create one?  And me with, erm, a bit of Dunning-Kruger effect and my programming language thought 'how hard could this possibly be?'  Erm, and so I agreed to- go ahead and actually create a- writing bot for this - nn, Melbourne group.  And I can say now, with the hindsight of several years, I 100% did not know what I was getting myself into when I made that decision.

The first commit to the Winnie the Writ- Writing Bot repository was made on the 3rd of December 2017.  And the first ever feature that went into Winnie was one that had come out of a lot of writing bots and writing groups beforehand, but that Timmy had as well, which was the word wars feature.  So these were pomodoro-like writing timers - pomodoro being a time-tracking method that involves spending blocks of 20 to 25 minutes persistently working and then having a break - these were pomodoro-like writing timers with a custom duration.  So you could say I want to write for 5 minutes, or 10 minutes, or 20 minutes, all the way up to 60 minutes.  On the technical side, Winnie was written in Node.js using the Discord.js API library, which interfaces directly with the Discord API.  The fact that Discord is closed-source, and that I had to use the Discord.js API library, will become important later.  We'll hold that thought.

So I worked on Winnie through December, and then 2018 rolled around.  And as- Winnie got bigger, I sort of started to look at some of the - principles that I had learned through my time learning coding.  And- one that came up a lot was the Agile Manifesto.  It was something that I'd read, it was something that a lot of people had suggested as a good way to manage these things.  And when I read the Agile Manifesto, and having read it again since, er, the opinion that I often come away with is - a lot of what people say is Agile is actually the exact opposite, because the Agile Manifesto; one of its primary focuses is on people over process.  There are many, many other aspects of the Agile Manifesto, but I took what was important to this project.  And the reason why it was so important was that- this was a community of people who actively expressed what they wanted.  It's a group of people who are super passionate about writing.  They all want to get together and get their stories, or plays, or whatever else it may be- down onto a piece of paper.

And so this was a community of people who were saying to me, you know: 'we want goal tracking'.  Then, of course, with scriptwriters, with people who were editing, 'we want the ability to trac- to track goals that aren't just words'.  So, as well as goal tracking, I added the ability to track goals in lines, pages, and minutes.  Subsequently, I also added items as an option.  Then people said 'Hey!  We've been doing these word wars, and everyone is- doing really well at the end of them and we're writing a lot, but we want to be able to see how much everyone has written at the end of the word wars!'  So I added summaries.  At the end of a word war, you could send a command to Winnie that said 'Hey, this was my total for this word war'.  And then, about five minutes after the war finished, she would print a nice summary that told you the word counts of everyone who'd participated.  She also tracked those counts in lines, pages, and minutes, if you happened to be a scriptwriter or an editor or something else.

And so begins th- my descent into the rabbit hole that- kind of got me to where I am in the tech industry today.  Because as I started working on Winnie, there were a lot of aspects that I realised could be improved, and often other people prompted me as well to think that they could be improved.  So I'd already looked at cloud infrastructure for a few other things - and, one of the first things that I did, when I realised that running this on a Raspberry Pi was not super scalable, was to set up a cloud infrastructure environment.  And what that meant was that, rather than having a bot that would only run at particular times, we had a bot that rarely went down.  People were really happy with that.  Then I had to tackle the issue of actually getting new code deployed.  Because obviously, I've got people who are asking me about a lot of different things, [swallow] and sometimes I want to be able to make really small incremental changes, and push them out to people so that they can actively see how those changes are working.

Early deployments though, because I was doing them manually, were very prone to bugs.  And that was where I fell down the DevOps and CI/CD rabbit hole.  I scripted it all up, I automated the deployment; and, not only did that prevent issues with manual deployments, it actually cut the deployment time by about 70%.  This effectively meant - that I could get some feedback from someone, I could quickly code it up, I could make a change, and I could push it up, and while that person was still talking to me, I could say to them 'Hey!  This small change, or small feature that you've requested, is now live.  Do you want to give it a try and see whether it works?'  And that was really good for getting the community involved, and for making people feel that they had a sense of ownership of what this project was turning into.

Another way, though, that I got the community involved was through Easter eggs.  And one of the really big Easter eggs in National Novel Writing Month communities is velociraptors.  They came out of a forum post many many years ago, about someone who wanted to write a gun that shoots velociraptors into their story.  And the main IRC chat bot Timmy had a raptor sighting mechanic.  Essentially, this was just- you could say raptor and the chat and raptors would appear.  I didn't really like that, because it discouraged people from- it wasn't something that so much tied into writing, it was something that just became a distraction, particularly when people were trying to focus.  And so I went 'all right, let's go down some more rabbit holes, and look at game theory'.  So I gamified the raptors.  If you met your daily goal, you would hatch a raptor.  If you got a certain percentage of the way through your daily goal, you had a percentage chance of hatching a raptor.  And at the end of every word war, you had another percentage chance of hatching a raptor.  And that meant that people kept on writing.  People kept on - they were still involved with the community aspects of it, but they kept on writing, they focused on meeting their goals.  Those raptors encouraged more people to write more often, because they wanted to hatch more raptors.  And it became very much a vector for friendly competition.

And then I had another terrible idea.  I went 'okay, well, there's these three communities in Australia that are using Winnie.  Maybe other people would benefit from Winnie as well'.  I knew that a lot of groups have become frustrated with IRC, Discord is obviously a very popular chat platform; I knew that some other local groups around the world had moved to Discord.  So I found my way to the National Novel Writing Month forums - this has now been wiped, but I've had someone ch- save a screenshot for me for posterity - and I put a post up on the forums about Winnie and how she worked, and invited people to- invite Winnie to their server.

And this was where we went international.  Erm, I was actually slightly surprised that groups outside Australia picked up Winnie and started using her, but they did.  And there were five early adopter groups that ended up being quite influential to the trajectory of Winnie and the way that things went.  Erm, the Elsewhere in Wisconsin group, which encompasses a lot of regional and rural Wisconsin; Augusta in Georgia, near the South Carolina border, and very famous for the PGA tour event that they host; McHenry and Lake Counties in Illinois, which are part of the greater Chicago suburbs; Birmingham and West Midlands in the UK, an area of the UK that I must say, er, having ancestors from there, has beautiful accents; and The Netherlands, which is one of the few areas in National Novel Writing Month where an entire country makes up a region.

And another thing that came out of these groups was, people were saying more and more, you know - the Australian groups that were originally involved with Winnie all knew each other, but now we had a bunch of other groups from internationally using Winnie, and what people were saying was they really wanted more cross-group interactions.  So we added an aggregate summary at the end of word wars; I set it up so that people could not see the individual totals of- everyone in other groups, but so that they could see how other groups compared, and how other groups compared per person.  I also set up a fully international raptor leaderboard, so that everyone from every single server could see how every other server everywhere in the world was faring in terms of raptors.

And then I started to hit some of the disadvantages of catering to an international, ah, group of people; the first one being timezones.  Erm, I actually had - because Australia has many timezones, and one of the Australian groups that I was working with encompassed all of Australia - I actually had a working timezone system which used the IANA timezone identifiers to handle Australian timezones.  That was fine.  That's what computers read in.  But as many of you, being technological people, would know, IANA timezone identifiers are not intuitive for people who don't have a deep understanding of how computers work.  And so that system relied on me being around to explain to people how to set their timezone.  But now we had other groups from all around the world who were picking up Winnie and trying to use her.  And these other groups-  nn, some of them didn't even speak the same language as me.  Many of them didn't have a good grasp of English.  We were in different timezones.  So other groups couldn't rely on my explanations of the timezone code.  And what this meant was that I needed to actually improve it; obviously there's no point in me being the single point of failure.  We'll come back to that, because that's another thing that comes up later quite a bit.  And so, as I improved the timezone code, what I was focusing on there was making the instructions clearer, so that even people without much of a technological background could still actually find their way to the Wikipedia page for the IANA timezone database identifiers, and work out which one was applicable to their current area of residence.

And then I had my first encounter with what some people might describe as a bad actor.  This was actually a really instructive learning experience for me, because- it was also one of the first times that someone with actual bona fide coding experience was using Winnie.  And this was someone who - in many ways I'm very grateful to, because they actually did a lot of stress testing of Winnie, that allowed me to work out what needed to be improved [pause] in many different ways.  And so what they had done was- they had actually set up a script, that generated word wars with names made up of emoji.  And it was- not great, for a couple of reasons.  The first one was that it was very hard for people who were cross-region, who wanted to be able to get in wars with each other, to find the wars that they wanted to get into in the list.  The other thing that was quite difficult for it was, there were a few users of Winnie who were screen reader users, and reading out all of those emoji took a lot of time.  Erm [pause] I went to the person and I asked them if they could possibly change this, and- they didn't take that too well.  It turned out that the script that generated word wars with names made up of emoji was very easily modified to make the names other things.

And this was a really good stress test.  Because what it taught me was- I actually had no validation in for any of this.  So it taught me about the importance of putting in validation; to make sure that the inputs that you're getting, particularly when you're dealing with a lot of people from around the place and you don't want to have to do manual verification, are the types of inputs that you're expecting.  It also taught me about a bunch of community moderation aspects that I hadn't really thought about when I was originally setting this up.  Part of the reason why that interaction became contentious was that I'd never really set parameters for what I needed from people for them to be able to be involved with this.  And so this person and I talked it out, er, we came to a reasonable resolution, and to this day I am - while they will remain nameless, I am very very grateful to them for the fact that they were reasonable in that discussion, and for what came out of that stress test - and I then went away and set up the first Code of Conduct.  And that arose from the need to be able to ask people to stop, to make sure that everyone coming in knew what the parameters of operation were.  And that was a really important thing.

So that took us into 2019.  Another event rolled around, and National- the people at National Novel Writing Month HQ had been having some discussions behind the scenes.  And one of the things that they had decided, erm, that really came to the forefront in 2019, was that they needed to update their website.  When I first started doing National Novel Writing Month, the National Novel Writing Month website looked like this.  It's fairly basic, but it's relatively easy to navigate with screen readers, it zooms in quite well, it's fairly clean, and it's apparent where everything is.  The National Novel- people at National Novel Writing Month HQ decided that they needed a website that was a bit more modern, erm, a bit more up-to-date with the times; and so they went away and they ran a fundraiser for this.  They originally planned to release the website in time for the 2018 event, but because of various factors that were outside their control, that release was delayed through March of 2019.  And- the website was eventually released to the public in September of 2019, just before the 2019 event. And when it was released, it looked like this.

Now, those of you who know me quite well are probably surprised that I've actually managed to get this far in the talk without talking too much about accessibility.  So as not to disappoint all of you, ah, here's the obligatory accessibility rant that has to happen in any talk that I give, because the redesigned National Novel Writing Month website looked more modern, yes.  It was using modern web frameworks.  It had the unfortunate side effect that because of the way that it had been designed, it was inaccessible to people with a lot of different disabilities.  And I'm not just talking about screen reader users being locked out here.  They generally tend to get the short end of the stick in terms of these things, but people with a whole variety of disabilities were locked out.  Other visually impaired users; people with dyslexia; people with traumatic brain injuries; neurodivergent people - Autistic people, people with ADHD; people from all of these demographics found their way to the National Novel Writing Month forums to express the fact that they were having difficulty with this new website.

And the National Novel Writing Month HQ- gave what is probably one of the best demonstrations that I have ever seen of how not to handle user feedback in response to this.  Because many people, including me, made access requests on the new forums.  We made them aware that there were issues about- [swallow] genuine accessibility issues about us being able to get around the website.  And- HQ's initial reaction to those access requests was to actually merge them all into a vent thread, which they were not reading.  And a lot of people were understandably very unhappy with that.  They promised to stop that behaviour, and they did - but even after that stopped, a lot of completely different access requests were merged in together.  I came in in the middle of this debacle not having followed any of it, because the site was really hard to get around, so I didn't know what was going on, but I can tell you I was not super happy when my request about- being unable to properly submit word counts on my zoomed-in screen, despite the fact that I said I did not use a screen reader, was filed with screen reader access issues.

And while National Novel Writing Month HQ were demonstrating how not to handle user feedback, erm, I was having some teething problems with Winnie, because I had never expected that I was going to have so many users; not when I started coding Winnie, and not when I put that post up on the forums.  And suddenly I was discovering that Winnie was actually outscaling the codebase.  I'd managed to get Winnie to work initially by being very responsive to user feedback; by taking into account the request of the community, and using them to build a better product.  But- what I was now finding was I'd effectively created a bodge job, and this didn't scale very well.  I wanted to be responsive.  I wanted to be involved.  But the codebase had got to the point where I was finding it really difficult to make requested changes, because it was exceptionally complex.  And this meant that I ended up feeling disconnected from the community, because- there wasn't that same level of give and take that there had been very early on in the project.  It was clear to me I was in well over my head, and I needed to get some new devs in.  I needed to get some people who could help me [pause] actually scale this.

So I went on to Winnie's Twitter account which had been created in a bit of a hurry earlier in the year, and I put out a series of Tweets, basically saying that I was looking for people to take over the task of maintaining Winnie.  I would teach anyone who wanted to get involved everything that they needed to know about coding to be able to get Winnie going and then some more, and stay on long enough to give them proper handover of everything that I'd done and my contacts within the communities.  Because when I originally put out this Tweet, I wasn't sure if I had the time and energy to be involved into the future.

So then 2020 rolls around.  And- we all know that 2020 was a bit of a year.  As- general events in the world were unfolding, ah, National Novel Writing Month HQ- looked at the COVID-19 situation very early on, and they decided that all regional events should be online only.  And what this meant was that groups that had never been online before - groups that skewed towards people who weren't particularly computer proficient for many reasons ranging from age to other demographic issues - suddenly had to move everything online.  And many of these regional groups looked at many of the options around - Discord, IRC, Slack, and other chat platforms - and they decided that they were going to move to Discord.

So, as we've already established, Winnie's code was a terrible bodge job... that many local regions now entirely depended on to be able to run anything related to National Novel Writing Month.  Oh dear.

And this was where I s- called in a favour.  Erm, I called in a favour from someone who now likes to be known as the Ostensibly Competent Dev.  Erm, she's actually a very competent dev indeed, and she volunteered her time to help me work on Winnie in May of 2020.  So, as we were building the core team, ah, she became the second member of the core team.  And her original engagement with the project was to start by rewriting the code in TypeScript.  And- the idea was, ah, this was going to get her a better idea of what the codebase was going to look like, and then we were going to essentially, ah, improve it from there.

And, in the process of doing that - this had given me a bit more ability to actually work on the things that were causing problems.  And so we'd managed, by the time of November 2020, to get the issue list down to one really major issue.  And that closed-source API thing - this is where that becomes important.  Because, working with an open-source API like IRC, a lot of issues tend to be communicated fairly readily and fairly openly, and open-source APIs in general seem to care more about backwards compatibility.  Discord was not open-source.  Er, Discord is a startup, and Discord had not really given thought as they were building their platform to issues like malicious actors - in that sense, Discord and I were very much in the same boat.  Erm, they had massive issues with malicious actors scraping data, which was a terrible problem for all of the reasons that you can possibly imagine and then some.  And so what they did was- they locked down their API to prevent people from using chatbots to indiscriminately scrape information about members of Discord servers.  When I originally built Winnie, because this wasn't locked down, it actually hadn't been necessary for me to do any proper permission checking, and proper permission checking hadn't even been documented in the API in the very early stages.  Erm, but because of the way that the infrastructure worked, after Discord made that API change, if Winnie didn't have access to a Discord channel and she attempted to post in it, it crashed the chatbot globally, which required a restart.

And that brings us to November.  And this was where things- took a turn, but it wasn't the turn that I expected.  Erm, the demographic of people who were involved in National Novel Writing Month broadened a little bit, erm, in 2020.  The online groups were more accessible to a lot of different people.  They were more accessible to people with disabilities; they were more accessible to people who because they were, say, full-time carers, might not have had the ability to get to o- in-person events; and they were also more accessible to people in isolated areas.  And what I started to see with this community that built itself up around Winnie and the users of Winnie was that there were people using her in ways that I hadn't seen before.  And through the whole thing, she'd kind of taken on this personality as more than a bot.  There were people who were using her for communication across regional groups; there were people who were actually scheduling challenges in the early morning and late night in their regional servers because that was the only time that they could get writing done; there were also a lot of users who were in multiple servers, and were now using Winnie across those servers.

And this was where we hit, ah, worldwide program problem number two: localisation.  We now had users in several non-English speaking countries.  There were also a bunch of regions who didn't use Winnie, or didn't use Winnie heavily, but wanted Winnie to be translated so that they could.  And, because of the way that I had run this project, and because of the- community that the core team were trying to foster - the core team being at that point two people - we decided that, you know what, we may as well do this.  And what we found is there are actually really good localisation frameworks available for most popular programming languages, including Node.js.  Luxon, which is the one that we chose, is also entirely open - or, not Luxon - sorry, Luxon's the timezone one!  Erm, i18next is entirely open-source and is a really really good framework.  And once we started asking around, we found that - for the communities that wanted those translations, there were actually a lot of people who were able to help, up to and including professional translators from multiple languages into English.

So that was amazing.  Another thing that Winnie was used for that we hadn't really seen before was events.  Ah, there was the Global Write-In Crawl; it was 40 hours long and it went across 26 different regions in the world.  About half of the regions involved use Winnie, but some of the best feedback that we got from the Global Write-In Crawl was actually from people who'd never used Winnie before and wanted different things out of her, or had ideas for how she could be improved.  The other event that went was, ah, Turkzilla.  It was a yearly Thanksgiving event; at the time it was run by two California MLs, one of whom has since stepped down, and it ran for nearly a week.  So this was in the order of 300 wars, all chained next to each other.  About 20 different regions participated in Turkzilla in 2020, and there was a whole lot of community- interaction that came up around that organically that wouldn't have happened otherwise.  Erm, there were also a lot of local regions who got together and ran their own events.  The Netherlands and Australia, being some of the bigger groups, had a raptor competition!  Erm, Birmingham and the West Midlands, one of the very early adopter regions, ran events with Augusta, another one of the early adopter regions, and Aberdeen in Scotland - a region that was much closer to them.  Ah, Raleigh-Durham and Flanders did both!  They had a raptor competition and they ran regular events together.  And, because I was so involved in the community, I was involved in a lot of those events, and I met several people at those events who offered to help.  Technical people who offered to help with coding and documentation, and non-technical people who offered to help with testing new features and bouncing things off them, so that we could build this in a way that worked for writers who were non-technical.

Issue 94 was the only critical bug remaining in the code in November of 2020.  Erm - and it happened a couple of times, but- one time in mid-November is particularly notable.  It was the middle of the morning, and the bot went down.  And this was a region that, because of the Global Write-In Crawl, I was actually in.  Ah, one of the admins of the region had accidentally kicked Winnie out of the regional Discord server, and went 'oh dear, I've taken Winnie down for the whole server'.  And then I popped in trying to find the cause of the crash, and went 'ah, actually you've taken Winnie down for pretty much everyone, but here: let me talk you through how to fix it'.  Erm, it turned out that this was someone who actually had some technical experience [pause] primarily as a project manager working in the field of healthcare.  And when I explained the cause of the bug, he volunteered his expertise.  And thus we caught ourselves a project manager.  Erm, he became core team member number three, and he got involved in December of 2020 after the event had - ah, wound up.  He did a couple of things very early on; the first one was to scope out everything that we needed to do, and the second one was to - I'd done- reasonable documentation, but he came and documented everything that I hadn't.

And so the three of us, then, basically set about playing catch-up.  Erm, we started meeting together, we worked out what we needed to do, and we worked out that essentially there were three major overhauls on the agenda.  The first one was that- erm, I'd bodged up all the code manually using scripts, or all of the infrastructure, and we needed to fix that.  Erm, so we decided we were going to migrate to Digital Ocean, and we were going to use Terraform - the open-source infrastructure as code provider - to- nn, set up the infrastructure as code.  Erm, at the time, certainly for open-source, it was the best option out there.  We also needed to migrate to version 12 of the Discord.js API library; it had many more features, there were a lot of improvements in there that we needed.  And we needed to move the database from MongoDa- MongoDB to Postgres because we needed relational databases in there.  Those three were fairly big tasks, so we basically made the decision to rewrite the entire codebase.  And there were a whole bunch of things that came out of having a core team rather than just me.  We had a scope statement; we had actually dictated what we needed to do and how we needed to get it done.  We had an issue board!  Erm, we had a Kanban board that we could use to track what we needed to do and when we needed to get it done.

And that brought us into 2021, which was a year that was going to cause us - a lot of interesting challenges.  Erm, the first one was, obviously, that we had to rebuild everything from scratch.  So- we got started on doing that, and through that we learned a lot about how we worked together as a group.  This again was something that we were working out on the fly.  Ee- We hadn't codified this really early on, because originally it had only been me.  So time ticked by, and time ticked by, and we started improving things - and then I looked at the calendar and it was suddenly September.  And I knew that we were going to blow through our deadline for rewriting Winnie.  There was still a chance that we were going to be able to meet it, but the reality of the situation was that - with the work that we had done, it was going to be a Titanic effort to actually get it out.  So, I started dedicating a lot more of my time to making sure that we were going to have something that we could push out.  And it was a good thing I did, because we did miss that deadline of November the 1st to get it going.  As it turned out, we were- we were going to blow through another deadline as well, because on November the 4th the old infrastructure for Winnie went down, and - I took one look at it and basically went 'we cannot possibly resurrect this'.  Fortunately, by that point we actually had enough out - to release an albeit incomplete version of Winnie 2.0 out into the wild.

And what we had come out of that was- a tremendous outpouring of community goodwill.  Everyone knew that this had been a real struggle, and we had a lot of offers of support from people again; to get involved with things, to help us out with testing things; and a lot of feedback on what we could improve.  In the background, we also had translators working away on the amount of the code base that we'd completed.  By the end of November, we had a complete translation of all of Winnie that had been written in Malay, partial translations in French and Swedish, and an almost complete translation in Latin.  And these translations were actually tested, and some of them are now being used by communities.  In the end [pause] our final deadline for releasing a reasonably complete version of Winnie 2.0 was- our aim was by the end of 2021.  It's not something that we've met perfectly, but we've released a version that has enough for us to be able to build on into the future and improve the project.

And I learned a huge number of things from doing this, even just in the last year.  I learned that - one of the really important things that I learned is that it takes time for teams to become cohesive.  It takes time for groups of people to work out how they function together.  It took time for the three of us to work out what kind of cadence we need- we needed, and how we needed to be able to deal with things as a core team, including how we needed to deal with really difficult issues.  But another very positive thing that came out of that was - all three of us, at the end of 2020 and 2021, despite the blown deadlines, knew what we needed to do to be able to keep the project on track in 2022.  I learned a lot about scalability and maintainability of code.  I learned that- the tools that you need t- to be able to build a code base when it's small, and you have a small group of users, are not the tools that you need to be able to- build on a really big code base - to be able to build a- code base that runs performatively and is easy to edit.  For example, MongoDB is really easy to use, and was an incredibly good choice until I decided that we needed to deal with relational data.  Then it became next to useless.  But in some cases, the original method of doing things did actually age well.  Even though we've been through several int- iterations of Winnie's CI/CD at this point, setting it up early really helped, because it allowed us to deal with the release cadence.  And the CI/CD that we're using now still meets a lot of those requirements, even though it's been through many iterations.

I learned a lot about project management.  Erm, I adapted Agile and that worked really well when I was dealing with a very small number of people, but as you might expect, it didn't actually scale.  The piece that I was missing there was an understanding of the scope; what did we need to do? what didn't we need to do? and a more streamlined method for being able to actually take into account user feedback.  So some of that was around the ground rules for communication that we set and that we're now setting for ourselves, but some of that was around things like the visual roadmap and the Kanban board that we could always refer back to to remind ourselves of the ultimate aim.  And I also learned a lot about- dealing with other people.  Wheaton's Law, erm, the- famous descriptor for how people interact around the internet - I'm sure that most of you know it - exists because interpersonal communication can actually be really hard.  And- one thing that we did when the core team was formed was we sat down and agreed that we needed standards for contributors going forward.  And what we were aiming for was- we wanted everyone to be themselves without it becoming a space that was no longer focused on writing.  So that meant that challenges to people were basically off the table, and we didn't want to have in-depth discussion of a lot of those things going on, because we needed to be able to keep strong focus on the project.  And that partly also meant that we needed to keep communication about the project in places where everyone could see it, rather than having important information in emails or our direct messages.

Nn- Part of what I learned about as well was teamwork.  For many many years doing this project, I was a single point of failure, and single points of failure are never great.  It was important for me to have other people involved; to be able to bounce perspectives off them; to have code reviewers so that we could anticipate each other's issues and write better code; and to have the different experiences and perspectives that everyone involved brings to the project.  Another thing that was very positive for us is all of the core team actually had prior experience with moderating communities, so we knew that it could be a bruising experience, and we all knew what we wanted going in.  The Code of Conduct that we wrote in early 2020 has stood up to having to deal with a couple of difficult interpersonal interactions since.

And the most important thing that I've learned from doing this is about the importance of stories.  I am a tiny part of the wider community that's built Winnie; yeah, I did a lot of the coding, but Winnie wouldn't exist in the form that she does without the community that came together and helped give me- ideas for her; without the community that have given me feedback; without the core team.  There are a lot of people in the world who took this really really silly idea and ran with it, and that was important, because it opened up so many possibilities.

And that story is also partly the story of good technology.  I didn't know it, but even though the code was a bodge job, I'd built a piece of tech that stood up in other ways.  It helped people to do what they wanted, which was to write - but it also gave them the ability to do things that they might not think about.  It gave them the ability to do things like goal tracking.  It gave them the ability to compete across fff- regions, and gave them this real sense of community.  And that's really a lot of, ah, the ethos of open-source.  And part of what I learned from this is open-source can actually be useful for non-technical people too.  If you build software that works the community will want to help, whether they're technical or not, and often non-technical people have a greater need for this software, because so much of what they can access is proprietary.  If you listen to them, they'll tell you what they need.

Thank you very much for coming with me as I told you this story.  Erm, if you have any questions, you can ask them- in the chat afterwards or my contacts are up there on the screen.  I hope that in telling this story I have inspired you- to go out and bring open-source to communities that don't often have access to it, and to help them tell their stories in whatever way they want to.
